I'll disrobe me
Of these Italian weedsand suit myself
As does a Briton peasant:so I'll fight
Against the part I comewith; so I'll die
For thee, O Imogen, evenfor whom my life
Is every breath a death;and thus, unknown,
Pitied nor hated, to theface of peril
Myself I'll dedicate.
Let me make men know
More valour in me than myhabits show.
Gods, put the strength o'the Leonati in me!
To shame the guise o' theworld, I will begin
The fashion, less withoutand more within.
The noise is roundabout us.
Let us from it.
What pleasure, sir, find wein life, to lock it
From action and adventure?
Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us?
We'll higher to themountains; there secure us.
To the king's party there'sno going:
This is, sir, a doubt
In such a time nothing becomingyou,
Nor satisfying us.
It is not likely
That when they hear the Romanhorses neigh,
Behold their quarter'd fires,have both their eyes
And ears so cloy'd importantlyas now,
That they will waste their timeupon our note,
To know from whence we are.
O, I am known
Of many in the army:many years,
Though Cloten then but young,you see, not wore him
From my remembrance.
Pray, sir, to the army:
I and my brother arenot known; yourself
So out of thought, andthereto so o'ergrown,
Cannot be question'd.
By this sun that shines,
I'll thither: what thing is itthat I never
Did see man die! scarce everlook'd on blood,
But that of coward hares, hotgoats, and venison!
Never bestrid a horse,save one that had
A rider like myself, who ne'erwore rowel
Nor iron on his heel! I amashamed
To look upon the holy sun,to have
The benefit of his blestbeams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.
By heavens, I'll go:
If you will bless me, sir, andgive me leave,
I'll take the better care, butif you will not,
The hazard thereforedue fall on me
by the hands of Romans!
So say I amen.
No reason I, since of your livesyou set
So slight a valuation, shouldreserve
My crack'd one to more care.Have with you, boys!
If in your country wars youchance to die,
That is my bed too, lads, anthere I'll lie:
Camest thou from wherethey made the stand?
I did.
Though you, it seems, comefrom the fliers.
No blame be to you, sir;for all was lost,
But that the heavensfought: the king himself
Of his wings destitute,the army broken,
And but the backs ofBritons seen, all flying
Through a straight lane;the enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the tongue withslaughtering, having work
More plentiful than toolsto do't, struck down
Some mortally, some slightlytouch'd, some falling
Merely through fear; thatthe straight pass was damm'd
With dead men hurt behind,and cowards living
To die with lengthen'dshame.
Where was this lane?
Close by the battle, ditch'd,and wall'd with turf;
Which gave advantage to anancient soldier,
An honest one, I warrant;who deserved
So long a breeding as hiswhite beard came to,
In doing this for'scountry: athwart the lane,
He, with two striplings-ladsmore like to run
The country base than tocommit such slaughter
With faces fit for masks,or rather fairer
Than those for preservationcased, or shame--
Made good the passage;cried to those that fled,
'Our Britain s harts dieflying, not our men:
To darkness fleet soulsthat fly backwards. Stand;
Or we are Romans and willgive you that
Like beasts which you shunbeastly, and may save,
But to look back in frown:stand, stand.'
These three,
Three thousand confident,in act as many--
For three performers arethe file when all
The rest do nothing--withthis word 'Stand, stand,'
Accommodated by the place,more charming
With their own nobleness,which could have turn'd
A distaff to a lance,gilded pale looks,
Part shame, part spiritrenew'd; that some,
turn'd coward
But by example--O, a sinin war,
Damn'd in the firstbeginners!--gan to look
The way that they did, andto grin like lions
Upon the pikes o' thehunters.
This was strange chance
A narrow lane, an old man,and two boys.
Nay, do not wonder at it:you are made
Rather to wonder at thethings you hear
Than to work any. Will yourhyme upon't,
And vent it for a mockery?Here is one:
'Two boys, an old mantwice a boy, a lane,
Preserved the Britons, wasthe Romans' bane.'
Nay, be not angry, sir.
'Lack, to what end?
Who dares not stand hisfoe, I'll be his friend;
For if he'll do as he ismade to do,
I know he'll quickly flymy friendship too.
You have put me intorhyme.
Farewell; you're angry.
Still going?
This is a lord! O noblemisery,
To be i' the field, andask 'what news?' of me!
To-day how many would havegiven their honours
To have saved theircarcasses! took heel to do't,
And yet died too! I, inmine own woe charm'd,
Could not find death whereI did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where hestruck:
being an ugly monster,
'Tis strange he hides himin fresh cups, soft beds,
Sweet words; or hath moreministers than we
That draw his knives i'the war.
Well, I will find him
For being now a favourerto the Briton,
No more a Briton, I haveresumed again
The part I came in: fightI will no more,
But yield me to theveriest hind that shall
Once touch my shoulder.
Great the slaughter is
Here made by the Roman;great the answer be
Britons must take. For me,my ransom's death;
On either side I come tospend my breath;
Which neither here I'llkeep nor bear again,
But end it by some meansfor Imogen.
Stand! who's there?
A Roman,
Lay hands on him; a dog!
You shall not now bestol'n,
you have locks upon you;
Most welcome, bondage! forthou art away,
I think, to liberty: yet amI better
Than one that's sick o'the gout;
since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuitythan be cured
By the sure physician,death, who is the key
To unbar these locks.
My conscience, thou artfetter'd
More than my shanks andwrists:
you good gods, give me
The penitent instrument topick that bolt,
Then, free for ever! Is'tenough I am sorry?
So children temporalfathers do appease;
Gods are more full ofmercy. Must I repent?
I cannot do it better thanin gyves,
Desired more thanconstrain'd: to satisfy,
If of my freedom 'tis themain part, take
No stricter render of methan my all.
I know you are moreclement than vile men,
Who of their brokendebtors take a third,
A sixth, a tenth, lettingthem thrive again
On their abatement: that'snot my desire:
For Imogen's dear lifetake mine; and though
'Tis not so dear, yet 'tisa life; you coin'd it:
'Tween man and man theyweigh not every stamp;
Though light, take piecesfor the figure's sake:
You rather mine, beingyours: and so, great powers,
If you will take thisaudit, take this life,
And cancel these coldbonds.
O Imogen!
I'll speak to thee insilence.
No more, thouthunder-master, show
Thy spite on mortal flies:
With Mars fall out, withJuno chide,
That thy adulteries
Rates and revenges.
Hath my poor boy doneaught but well,
Whose face I never saw?
I died whilst in the wombhe stay'd
Attending nature's law:
Lucina lent not me heraid,
But took me in my throes;
That from me was Posthumusript,
Came crying 'mongst hisfoes,
A thing of pity!
With marriage whereforewas he mock'd,
To be exiled, and thrown
From Leonati seat, andcast
From her his dearest one,
Sweet Imogen?
Why did you sufferIachimo,
Slight thing of Italy,
To taint his nobler heartand brain
With needless jealosy;
And to become the geck andscorn
O' th' other's villany?
Since, Jupiter, our son isgood,
Take off his miseries.
Peep through thy marblemansion; help;
Or we poor ghosts will cry
To the shining synod ofthe rest
Against thy deity.
Help, Jupiter; or weappeal,
And from thy justice fly.
No more, you petty spiritsof region low,
Offend our hearing; hush!How dare you ghosts
Accuse the thunderer,whose bolt, you know,
Sky-planted batters allrebelling coasts?
Poor shadows of Elysium,hence, and rest
Upon your never-witheringbanks of flowers:
Be not with mortalaccidents opprest;
No care of yours it is;you know 'tis ours.
Whom best I love I cross;to make my gift,
The more delay'd,delighted. Be content;
Your low-laid son ourgodhead will uplift:
His comforts thrive, histrials well are spent.
Our Jovial star reign'd athis birth, and in
Our temple was he married.Rise, and fade.
He shall be lord of ladyImogen,
And happier much by hisaffliction made.
This tablet lay upon hisbreast, wherein
Our pleasure his fullfortune doth confine:
and so, away: no furtherwith your din
Express impatience, lestyou stir up mine.
Sleep, thou hast been agrandsire, and begot
A father to me; and thouhast created
A mother and two brothers:
but, O scorn!
Gone! they went hence sosoon as they were born:
And so I am awake. Poorwretches that depend
On greatness' favour dreamas I have done,
Wake and find nothing.But, alas, I swerve:
Many dream not to find,neither deserve,
And yet are steep'd infavours: so am I,
That have this goldenchance and know not why.
What fairies haunt thisground? A book? O rare one!
Be not, as is our fangledworld, a garment
Nobler than that itcovers: let thy effects
So follow, to be mostunlike our courtiers,
As good as promise.
'When as a lion's whelpshall, to himself unknown,
without seeking find, andbe embraced by a piece of
tender air; and when froma stately cedar shall be
lopped branches, which,being dead many years,
shall after revive, bejointed to the old stock
and freshly grow; then shallPosthumus end his miseries,
Britain be fortunate andflourish in peace and plenty.'
'Tis still a dream, orelse such stuff as madmen
Tongue and brain not;either both or nothing;
Or senseless speaking or aspeaking such
As sense cannot untie. Bewhat it is,
The action of mylife is like it,
which I'll keep, ifbut for sympathy.
Come, sir, are you readyfor death?
Over-roasted rather; readylong ago.
Hanging is the word, sir:
if you be ready for that,you are well cooked.
So, if I prove a goodrepast to the spectators,
the dish pays the shot.
A heavy reckoning for you,sir. But the comfort is,
you shall be calledto no more payments,
fear no more tavern-bills;which are often the sadness
of parting, as theprocuring of mirth:
of this contradictionyou shall now be quit.
O, the charity of a pennycord!
Knock off his manacles;
bring your prisoner tothe king.
Thou bring'st good news; Iam called to be made free.
I'll be hang'd then.
Stand by my side, you whomthe gods have made
Preservers of my throne.Woe is my heart
That the poor soldier thatso richly fought,
Whose rags shamed gildedarms, whose naked breast
Stepp'd before larges ofproof, cannot be found:
He shall be happy that canfind him, if
Our grace can make him so.
I never saw
Such noble fury in so poora thing;
Such precious deeds in onethat promises nought
But beggary and poorlooks.
No tidings of him?
He hath been search'damong the dead and living,
But no trace of him.
To my grief, I am
The heir of his reward;
which I will add
To you, the liver, heartand brain of Britain,
By whom I grant she lives.'Tis now the time
To ask of whence you are.Report it.
Sir,
In Cambria are we born,and gentlemen:
Further to boast wereneither true nor modest,
Unless I add, we arehonest.
Bow your knees.
Arise my knights o' thebattle: I create you
Companions to our personand will fit you
With dignities becomingyour estates.
There's business in thesefaces. Why so sadly
Greet you our victory? youlook like Romans,
And not o' the court ofBritain.
Hail, great king!
To sour your happiness, Imust report
The queen is dead.
Who worse than a physician
Would this report become?But I consider,
By medicine life may beprolong'd, yet death
Will seize the doctor too.How ended she?
With horror, madly dying,like her life,
Which, being cruel to theworld, concluded
Most cruel to herself.What she confess'd
I will report, so pleaseyou: these her women
Can trip me, if I err; whowith wet cheeks
Were present when shefinish'd.
Prithee, say.
First, she confess'd shenever loved you, only
Affected greatness got byyou, not you:
Married your royalty, waswife to your place;
Abhorr'd your person.
She alone knew this;
And, but she spoke itdying, I would not
Believe her lips inopening it. Proceed.
Your daughter, whom shebore in hand to love
With such integrity, shedid confess
Was as a scorpion to hersight; whose life,
But that her flightprevented it, she had
Ta'en off by poison.
O most delicate fiend!
Who is 't can read awoman? Is there more?
More, sir, and worse. Shedid confess she had
For you a mortal mineral;which, being took,
Should by the minute feedon life and lingering
By inches waste you: inwhich time she purposed,
By watching, weeping,tendance, kissing, to
O'ercome you with hershow, and in time,
When she had fitted youwith her craft, to work
Her son into the adoptionof the crown:
Heard you all this, herwomen?
We did, so please yourhighness.
Mine eyes
Were not in fault, for shewas beautiful;
Mine ears, that heard herflattery; nor my heart,
That thought herlike her seeming;
it had been vicious
To have mistrusted her:yet, O my daughter!
That it was folly in me,thou mayst say,
And prove it in thyfeeling. Heaven mend all!
Thou comest not, Caius,now for tribute
Consider, sir, the chanceof war: the day
Was yours by accident; hadit gone with us,
We should not, when theblood was cool,
have threaten'd
Our prisoners with thesword. But since the gods
Will have it thus, thatnothing but our lives
May be call'd ransom, letit come: sufficeth
A Roman with a Roman'sheart can suffer:
Augustus lives to thinkon't: and so much
For my peculiar care.
This one thing only
I will entreat; my boy, aBriton born,
Let him be ransom'd:
never master had a page sokind, so duteous, diligent,
So tender over hisoccasions, true,
So feat, so nurse-like:let his virtue join
With my request, which Imake bold your highness
Cannot deny; he hath doneno Briton harm,
Though he have served aRoman: save him, sir,
And spare no blood beside.
I have surely seen him:
His favour is familiarto me.
Boy, Thou hast look'dthyself into my grace,
And art mine own. I knownot why, wherefore,
To say 'live, boy:' ne'erthank thy master; live:
And ask of Cymbeline whatboon thou wilt,
Fitting my bounty and thystate, I'll give it;
Yea, though thou do demanda prisoner,
The noblest ta'en.
I humbly thank yourhighness.
I do not bid thee beg mylife, good lad;
And yet I know thou wilt.
No, no: alack,
There's other work inhand: I see a thing
Bitter to me as death:your life, good master,
Must shuffle for itself.
The boy disdains me,
He leaves me, scorns me:briefly die their joys
That place them on thetruth of girls and boys.
What wouldst thou, boy?Speak.
Know'st him thou look'ston?
Is he thy kin? thy friend?
He is a Roman; no more kinto me
Than I to your highness;who, being born your vassal,
Am something nearer.
Wherefore eyest him so?
I'll tell you, sir, inprivate, if you please
To give me hearing.
Ay, with all my heart,
And lend my best attention.What's thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thou'rt my good youth, mypage;
I'll be thy master: walkwith me; speak freely.
Is not this boy revivedfrom death?
One sand another
Not more resembles thatsweet rosy lad
Who died, and was Fidele.What think you?
The same dead thing alive.
Peace, peace! see further;he eyes us not; forbear;
It is my mistress:
Since she is living, letthe time run on
To good or bad.
Stand thou by ourside;
Make thy demand aloud.
Sir, step you forth;
Give answer to this boy,and do it freely;
Or, by our greatness andthe grace of it,
Which is our honour,bitter torture shall
Winnow the truthfrom falsehood.
On, speak to him.
My boon is, that thisgentleman may render
Of whom he had this ring.
What's that to him?
That diamond upon yourfinger, say
How came it yours?
Thou'lt torture me toleave unspoken that
Which, to be spoke, wouldtorture thee.
How! me?
I am glad to beconstrain'd to utter that
Which torments me toconceal.
By villany I got this ring:'twas Leonatus' jewel;
Whom thou didst banish;
and--which moremay grieve thee,
As it doth me--a noblersir ne'er lived
'Twixt sky and ground. Wiltthou hear more, my lord?
All that belongs to this.
That paragon, thydaughter,--
For whom my heart dropsblood, and my false spirits
Quail to remember--Give meleave; I faint.
My daughter! what of her?Renew thy strength:
I had rather thou shouldstlive while nature will
Than die ere I hear more:strive, man, and speak.
Upon a time,--unhappy wasthe clock
That struck the hour!--itwas in Rome,--accursed
The mansion where!--'twasat a feast,--O, would
Our viands had beenpoison'd, or at least
Those which I heaved tohead!
--the good Posthumus--
What should I say? he wastoo good to be
Where ill men were; andwas the best of all
Amongst the rarest of goodones,--sitting sadly,
Hearing us praise ourloves of Italy
For beauty that madebarren the swell'd boast
Of him that best couldspeak, for feature, laming
The shrine of Venus, orstraight-pight Minerva.
Postures beyond briefnature, for condition,
A shop of all thequalities that man
Loves woman for, besidesthat hook of wiving,
Fairness which strikes theeye--
I stand on fire:
Come to the matter.
All too soon I shall,
Unless thou wouldst grievequickly.
This Posthumus,
Most like a noble lord inlove and one
That had a royal lover,took his hint;
And, not dispraising whomwe praised,--therein
He was as calm asvirtue--he began
His mistress' picture;which by his tongue
being made,
And then a mind put in't,either our brags
Were crack'd ofkitchen-trolls,
or his description Provedus unspeaking sots.
Nay, nay, to the purpose.
Your daughter'schastity--there it begins.
He spake of her, as Dianhad hot dreams,
And she alone were cold:whereat I, wretch,
Made scruple of his praise;and wager'd with him
Pieces of gold 'gainstthis which then he wore
Upon his honour'd finger,to attain
In suit the place of's bedand win this ring
By hers and mine adultery.
He, true knight,
No lesser of her honourconfident
Than I did truly find her,stakes this ring;
And would so, had it beena carbuncle
Of Phoebus' wheel, andmight so safely, had it
Been all the worth of'scar.
Away to Britain
Post I in this design:well may you, sir,
Remember me at court;where I was taught
Of your chaste daughterthe wide difference
'Twixt amorous andvillanous.
Being thus quench'd
Of hope, not longing, mineItalian brain
'Gan in your dullerBritain operate
Most vilely; for myvantage, excellent:
And, to be brief, mypractise so prevail'd,
That I return'd withsimular proof enough
To make the noble Leonatusmad,
By wounding his belief inher renown
With tokens thus, andthus;
averting notes ofchamber-hanging,
pictures, this herbracelet,--
O cunning, how I gotit!--nay, some marks
Of secret on her person,that he could not
But think her bond ofchastity quite crack'd,
I having ta'en the forfeit.
Whereupon-- Methinks,I see him now--
Ay, so thou dost,
Italian fiend! Ay me, mostcredulous fool,
Egregious murderer, thief,any thing
That's due to all thevillains past, in being,
To come! O, give me cord,or knife, or poison,
Some upright justicer!Thou, king, send out
For torturers ingenious:it is I
That all the abhorredthings o' the earth amend
By being worse than they.I am Posthumus,
That kill'd thydaughter:
--villain-like, I lie--
That caused a lesservillain than myself,
A sacrilegious thief, todo't:
the temple Of virtue wasshe; yea, and she herself.
Spit, and throw stones,cast mire upon me,
set the dogs o' the streetto bay me: every villain
Be call'd PosthumusLeonitus;
and be villany lessthan 'twas!
O Imogen!
My queen, my life, mywife! O Imogen,
Imogen, Imogen!
Peace, my lord; hear,hear--
Shall's have a play ofthis? Thou scornful page,
There lie thy part.
O, gentlemen, help!
Mine and your mistress! O,my lord Posthumus!
You ne'er kill'd Imogentil now. Help, help!
Mine honour'd lady!
Does the world go round?
How come these staggers onme?
Wake, my mistress!
If this be so, the gods domean to strike me
To death with mortal joy.
How fares thy mistress?
O, get thee from my sight;
Thou gavest me poison:dangerous fellow, hence!
Breathe not where princesare.
The tune of Imogen!
Lady,
The gods throw stonesof sulphur on me,
if that box I gave youwas not thought by me
A precious thing: I had itfrom the queen.
It poison'd me.
O gods!
I left out one thing whichthe queen confess'd.
Which must approve theehonest: 'If Pisanio
Have,' said she, 'given hismistress that confection
Which I gave him forcordial, she is served
As I would serve a rat.'
Have you ta'en of it?
Most like I did, for I wasdead.
My boys, There was ourerror.
This is, sure, Fidele.
Why did you throw yourwedded lady from you?
Think that you are upon arock;
and now throw me again.
Hang there like a fruit,my soul,
Till the tree die!
How now, my flesh, mychild!
What, makest thou me adullard in this act?
Wilt thou not speak to me?
Your blessing, sir.
My tears that fall
Prove holy water on thee!
Imogen, Thy mother's dead.
I am sorry for't, my lord.
O, she was nought; andlong of her it was
That we meet here sostrangely: but her son
Is gone, we know not hownor where.
My lord,
Now fear is from me, I'llspeak troth. Lord Cloten,
Upon my lady's missing,came to me
With his sword drawn; foam'dat the mouth, and swore,
If I discover'd not whichway she was gone,
It was my instant death.
By accident, had a feignedletter of my master's
Then in my pocket; whichdirected him
To seek her on themountains near to Milford;
Where, in a frenzy, in mymaster's garments,
Which he enforced from me,away he posts
With unchaste purpose andwith oath to violate
My lady's honour: whatbecame of him
I further know not.
Let me end the story:
I slew him there.
Marry, the gods forfend!
I would not thy good deedsshould from my lips
Pluck a bard sentence:prithee, valiant youth,
Deny't again.
I have spoke it, and Idid it.
He was a prince.
A most incivil one: thewrongs he did me
Were nothing prince-like;for he did provoke me
With language that wouldmake me spurn the sea,
If it could so roar to me:I cut off's head;
And am right glad he isnot standing here
To tell this tale of mine.
I am sorry for thee:
By thine own tonguethou art condemn'd,
and must endure ourlaw.
Bind the offender,
And take him from ourpresence.
Stay, sir king:
This man is better thanthe man he slew,
As well descended asthyself; and hath
More of thee merited thana band of Clotens
Had ever scar for.
Let his arms alone;
They were not born forbondage.
Why, old soldier,
Wilt thou undo the worththou art unpaid for,
By tasting of our wrath?
How of descent as goodas we?
In that he spake too far.
And thou shalt die for't.
We will die all three:
But I will prove that twoon's are as good
As I have given out him.
My sons, I must,
For mine own part, unfolda dangerous speech,
Though, haply, well foryou.
Your danger's ours.
And our good his.
Have at it then, by leave.
Thou hadst, great king, asubject who
Was call'd Belarius.
What of him?
He is a banish'd traitor.
He it is that hath
Assumed this age; indeed abanish'd man;
I know not how a traitor.
Take him hence:
The whole world shall notsave him.
Not too hot:
First pay me for thenursing of thy sons;
And let it be confiscateall, so soon
As I have received it.
Nursing of my sons!
I am too blunt and saucy:here's my knee:
Ere I arise, I will prefermy sons;
Then spare not the oldfather. Mighty sir,
These two young gentlemen,that call me father
And think they are mysons, are none of mine;
They are the issue of yourloins, my liege,
And blood of yourbegetting.
How! my issue!
So sure as you yourfather's. I, old Morgan,
Am that Belarius whom yousometime banish'd:
These gentle princes--
For such and so theyare--these twenty years
Have I train'd up: thosearts they have as I
Could put into them; mybreeding was, sir, as
Your highness knows. Theirnurse, Euriphile,
Whom for the theft Iwedded,
stole these children
Upon my banishment: Imoved her to't,
Having received thepunishment before,
For that which I did then:beaten for loyalty
Excited me to treason:their dear loss,
The more of you 'twasfelt, the more it shaped
Unto my end of stealingthem. But, gracious sir,
Here are your sons again;and I must lose
Two of the sweet'stcompanions in the world.
The benediction of thesecovering heavens
Fall on their heads likedew! for they are worthy
To inlay heaven withstars.
Thou weep'st, andspeak'st.
The service that you threehave done is more
Unlike than this thoutell'st. I lost my children:
If these be they, I knownot how to wish
A pair of worthier sons.
Be pleased awhile.
This gentleman, whom Icall Polydore,
Most worthy prince, asyours, is true Guiderius:
This gentleman, my Cadwal,Arviragus,
Your younger princely son;he, sir, was lapp'd
In a most curious mantle,wrought by the hand
Of his queen mother, whichfor more probation
I can with ease produce.
Guiderius had
Upon his neck a mole, asanguine star;
It was a mark of wonder.
This is he;
Who hath upon him stillthat natural stamp:
It was wise nature's endin the donation,
To be his evidence now.
O, what, am I
A mother to the birth ofthree? Ne'er mother
Rejoiced deliverance more.Blest pray you be,
That, after this strangestarting from your orbs,
may reign in them now!
O Imogen, thou hast lostby this a kingdom.
No, my lord;
I have got two worlds by't. O my gentle brothers,
Have we thus met? O, neversay hereafter
But I am truest speakeryou call'd me brother,
When I was but yoursister; I you brothers,
When ye were so indeed.
Did you e'er meet?
Ay, my good lord.
And at first meetingloved;
O rare instinct!
See, Posthumusanchors upon Imogen,
And she, like harmlesslightning, throws her eye
On him, her brothers,me, her master,
hitting each object witha joy:
Let's quit this ground,
And smoke the temple withour sacrifices.
Thou art my brother; sowe'll hold thee ever.
My good master,
I will yet do you service.
Happy be you!
The forlorn soldier, thatso nobly fought,
He would have well becomedthis place, and graced
The thankings of a king.
I am, sir,
The soldier that didcompany these three
In poor beseeming; 'twas afitment for
The purpose I thenfollow'd. That I was he,
Speak, Iachimo: I had youdown and might
Have made you finish.
I am down again:
But now my heavyconscience sinks my knee,
As then your force did. Takethat life, beseech you,
Which I so often owe: butyour ring first;
And here the bracelet ofthe truest princess
That ever swore her faith.
Kneel not to me:
The power that I have onyou is, to spare you;
The malice towardsyou to forgive you:
Live, and deal withothers better.
Nobly doom'd!
We'll learn our freenessof a son-in-law;
Pardon's the word to all.
You holp us, sir,
As you did mean indeed tobe our brother;
Joy'd are we that you are.
Your servant, princes.Good my lord of Rome,
Call forth yoursoothsayer:
as I slept, methought
Great Jupiter, upon hiseagle back'd,
Appear'd to me, with otherspritely shows
Of mine own kindred: whenI waked, I found
This label on my bosom;whose containing
Is so from sense inhardness, that I can
Make no collection of it:
let her show her skillin the construction.
Read, and declare themeaning.
'When as a lion's whelpshall, to himself
unknown, without seekingfind, and be embraced by a
piece of tender air; andwhen from a stately cedar
shall be lopped branches,which, being dead
many years, shall afterrevive,
be jointed to the oldstock, and freshly grow;
then shall Posthumusend his miseries,
Britain be fortunate andflourish in peace and plenty.'
Thou, Leonatus, art thelion's whelp;
The fit and aptconstruction of thy name,
Being Leonatus, dothimport so much.
The piece of tender air,thy virtuous daughter,
Which we call 'mollisaer;' and 'mollis aer'
We term it 'mulier:' which'mulier' I divine
Is this most constantwife; who, even now,
Answering the letter ofthe oracle,
Unknown to you, unsought,were clipp'd about
With this most tender air.
This hath some seeming.
The lofty cedar, royalCymbeline,
Personates thee: and thylopp'd branches point
Thy two sons forth; who,by Belarius stol'n,
For many years thoughtdead, are now revived,
To the majestic cedarjoin'd, whose issue
Promises Britain peace andplenty.
Well
My peace we will begin.
And, Caius Lucius,
Although the victor, wesubmit to Caesar,
And to the Roman empire;promising
To pay our wonted tribute,from the which
We were dissuaded by ourwicked queen;
Whom heavens, in justice,both on her and hers,
Have laid most heavy hand.
The fingers of the powersabove do tune
The harmony of this peace.The vision
Which I made known toLucius, ere the stroke
Of this yet scarce-coldbattle, at this instant
Is full accomplish'd; forthe Roman eagle,
From south to west on wingsoaring aloft,
Lessen'd herself, and inthe beams o' the sun
So vanish'd: which foreshow'dour princely eagle,
The imperial Caesar,should again unite
His favour with theradiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in thewest.
Laud we the gods;
And let our crooked smokesclimb to their nostrils
From our blest altars.